# Hacking the Aeternity Codebase

## Building
See [Build](build.md) for details.
 - Dependencies
   - Ubuntu: `sudo apt install autoconf build-essential cmake erlang
     libsodium-dev libgmp-dev`
   - Mac OS: `brew install erlang@24 openssl libsodium autoconf gmp cmake
     automake`

```shell
git clone https://github.com/aeternity/aeternity.git
cd aeternity
make prod-build
```

The Aeternity build system uses Rebar3 to do the heavy work, and wraps this
in a Makefile for ease of use. To hack on Aeternity you need some basic
knowledge about Rebar3. See [Quick Guide to Rebar](rebar.md) for a
comprehensive introduction.


## Configuration files
 - You can use either `.json` or `.yaml` to specify the user-level
   configuration. By default, the system looks for
   `~/.aeternity/aeternity/aeternity.{json,yaml}` or
   `aeternity.{json,yaml}` in the top directory. You can also set
   environment variables on the form `AE__...`, e.g.
   `AE__HTTP__CORS__MAX_AGE`. See [docs/configuration.md] for details.
 - The system first reads the usual Erlang system configuration files
   (specific per release, in `_build/prod/rel/aeternity/releases/*/`). These
   are generated from the corresponding source files under `config/`:
   - `vm.args` for Erlang VM options.
   - `sys.config` for overriding the Erlang application defaults (the `.app`
     files).


## Running
See [Operation](operation.md) for details.

### Starting the system with an Erlang terminal prompt
```shell
cd _build/prod/rel/aeternity`
bin/aeternity console
```

### Opening an Erlang shell for running a unit or integration test

Rebar lets you open an Erlang shell with one or more profiles applied, such
as `test`. This sets up paths to test apps, etc., which will not be
available in the default profile. By default all apps listed in the release
spec will be started; to avoid this, specify `--apps ""`:
```shell
rebar3 as test shell --apps ""
```
or for system testing
```shell
rebar3 as system_test shell --apps ""
```

The system can then be started manually from the Erlang shell like this:
```erlang
    application:load(aecore),
    TempDir = aec_test_utils:create_temp_key_dir(),
    application:set_env(aecore, keys_dir, TempDir),
    application:set_env(aecore, password, <<"secret">>),
    application:ensure_all_started(aecore).
```
after which you can do your testing. To clean up
the temporary directory that was created, do:
```erlang
 aec_test_utils:remove_temp_key_dir(TempDir).
```


## Aeternity Code structure
- How the system starts
  - There is no single function call to start the Aeternity system. There
    is a start script (`_build/prod/rel/aeternity/bin/aeternity`) which
    is generated by Rebar3 when you run e.g. `make prod-build` or `make
    prod-package`. The package would typically be installed under
    `~/aeternity/node` and it is assumed that you start the system from
    the install directory (or directly from the build directory). You
    typically run it as `bin/aeternity daemon` or `bin/aeternity
    console`.
    - The start script is a modified version of the "extended start
      script" that Rebar3 would normally generate from its standard
      template. The source file for the Aeternity version is located in
      `scripts/aeternity_bin`. This file should be kept up to date with
      changes in the upstream Rebar3 version (which is part of `relx`).
  - The start script starts Erlang with a custom boot file generated by
    Rebar3, named `start.boot` or `aeternity.boot` (in
    `_build/prod/rel/aeternity/releases/*/`). It is specific for each release
    and specifies exactly what processes and applications should be started
    when the Erlang system boots. (The `.boot` file is in a binary format
    that the system can read at boot time without needing to load any other
    modules such as for parsing text. To see what the boot file does, look at
    the corresponding source file `start.script` (or `aeternity.script`)
    instead.)
    - That the system starts from a boot file means that applications not
      listed in the boot script will not be available in the code path when
      the system is running, even if they are normally in the standard
      Erlang/OTP distribution; e.g., `debugger`, `wx`, or `parsetools`. If
      wanted, such extras must be added manually, or run from a separate
      Erlang instance.
    - Multiple releases can be installed alongside each other, and the code
      paths in the boot script typically name the versions of the
      applications (in the `lib` directory under the installation root), so
      e.g. release 1.1 could be using the version `"lib/xyz-2.0.3"` of
      application `xyz`, while release 1.2 uses the version
      `"lib/xyz-2.1.1"`. The start script (`bin/aeternity`) picks the
      release version to use.
  - The `.boot` and `.script` files are generated automatically by the
    release-building tools of Rebar3, using the `relx` specification section
    of the `rebar.config` file. This is where you list all the Erlang
    applications that should be included in the release and started when the
     Aeternity system boots. (They will be "started" regardless of whether
    they actually start any processes. This loads the app configuration.) The
    start order in the `.boot` file is made to obey the application
    dependencies found in the individual `*.app` files (usually generated
    from `*.app.src` files) that provide the per-application metadata: for
    example, the `apps/aehttp/src/aehttp.app.src` file specifies that
    `aecore` must be started before `aehttp` can start. Hence, when the
    Erlang system boots, it will launch all specified applications in a
    suitable order, and when all are running, the system is up. There is no
    specific single entry point to the system.
    - The boot script also includes the app configuration from the `{env,
      ...}` sections of the `.app` (or `.app.src`) files *at build time*, and
      sets these configurations as the system boots. *Modifying the `.app`
      files in the installed system has no effect.* Use the `sys.config` or
      command line options to override the build-time configuration.
    - Furthermore, *Rebar3 doesn't rebuild dependency apps (under
      `_build/default/lib`) if they get modified*, so updating e.g.
      `_build/default/lib/lager/src/lager.app.src` will have no effect on
      `lager.app` (and hence not on the produced release build) - you must
      delete the existing `_build/default/lib/lager/ebin/lager.app` file to
      force Rebar3 to rebuild it.
  - The (nonstandard) `setup` application, which is assumed to start very
    early in the boot sequence, provides extra startup configuration magic:
    - It scans all application configurations for entries with the key
      `'$setup_hooks'`, specifying callback functions to be executed by
      `setup`. (See e.g. `aeutils.app.src`.)
      - Because the boot script loads all application configurations and
        modules before it starts the first application, the full list of
        applications and their configuration is known when `setup` is
        started.
      - The Aeternity system uses these callbacks to read the
        `aeternity.{yaml,json}` (`aeu_env:read_config()`) file, inject
        overrides from OS environment variables `AE__...`
        (`aeu_env:apply_os_env()`), and load plugins
        (`aeu_plugins:load_plugins()`) before the rest of the system starts,
        as well as perform sanity checks on configurations
        (`aecore_env:check_env()`, etc.).
    - It has "smart" `get_env()` functions which can perform advanced
      variable expansion on the configuration values. E.g., if an application
      `x` has a configuration entry `{log_dir, "$HOME/log"}`, then calling
      `setup:get_env(x, log_dir)` will return something like
      "/home/username/log". (This only works on variables defined via `setup`
      itself, not general shell environment variables - `$HOME` is a
      predefined special case.)
    - Setup has a configuration option `data_dir` which the Aeternity system
      uses to know where its database is located. The directory needs to
      already exist and be populated at system start, else the startup fails.
  - The (nonstandard) `app_ctrl` application provides additional control over
    the start order in the system. Normally, the applications are started in
    the order listed in the `relx` specification of `rebar.config`, modified
    to obey the dependencies listed in the individual `.app.src` files. This
    means that applications can specify that they must be started *after*
    other applications that they know about and depend on, but application
    `x` cannot specify that it needs to start *before* another application
    `y` which is unaware of `x` and whose dependencies (in its `.app` file)
    cannot be modified.
    - The `app_ctrl` app hooks into the kernel application, which is always
      the first to start, by configuring `app_ctrl_bootstrap` to run as
      (dummy) handler of the logger functionality in the kernel. This is done
      in the `sys.config`. When the kernel app starts, this launches the
      `app_ctrl_server` process (but not the `app_ctrl` application itself).
    - The `app_ctrl_server` looks for configuration both in the normal
      `app_ctrl` app environment, and by scanning other applications for
      entries with the key `'$app_ctrl'` (using functionality from `setup`;
      see above). In Aeternity, this can be found in the `aecore.app.src`
      file.
    - The `app_ctrl` configuration can specify per application that the app
      needs to be started before certain other apps. It can also define
      "roles", which are sets of apps, and "modes", which are sets of roles.
      Applications that are not explicitly mentioned in the configuration are
      left to the standard application controller.
    - If you try to make an application in Aeternity depend on (start after)
      one of those applications that are managed by `app_ctrl`, such as
      `aehttp`, then you will get a crash during startup with error messages
      containing `{orphans,[...]}` and `apps_not_found: [...]`. To fix this
      you must also add your app to the same "roles" in the `'$app_ctrl'`
      section of `aecore.app.src`.
    - When the real `app_ctrl` application is finally started, it just sets
      up a supervisor and a worker process which acts as a proxy that links
      itself to the already running `app_ctrl_server` process, so that the
      application crashes if the server process crashes.
  - Logging is done via the Lager app. A handler `aeu_lager_logger_handler`
    for the standard OTP logger is also set up in the `sys.config`, which
    forwards standard log messages to Lager.
    - The `aeutils.app.src` file configures a hook for the `setup` app,
      making it call `aeu_logging_env:adjust_log_levels()` when `setup`
      starts. (Note that `aeutils` configuration must thus be loaded before
      `setup` runs, which it will be when running from a boot script.) This
      will also call `aeu_logging_env:expand_lager_log_root()` to ensure
      that `lager` has its `log_root` configuration set, using
      `setup:log_dir()` as the default. Furthermore it rewrites the log
      root setting to be an absolute path, to ensure that the logging is
      not affected by changes to the current working directory of the
      Erlang VM during execution.
    - As soon as lager starts, it will create the log directory and all log
      files using its current configuration.
    - Since `setup` and `lager` don't know about each other's existence,
      their `.app` files do not specify any dependency between them. Their
      relative order in the `relx` specification thus decides their actual
      order in the boot script.
    - The `lager` configuration in `sys.config` sets up both a handler that
      writes to the console, and a handler that writes to the
      `aeternity.log` logfile. It also configures additional logging sinks,
      for which corresponding modules are generated dynamically, so that
      the sink whose name is `epoch_mining_lager_event` can be used by
      calling `epoch_mining:info(...)`, and so on. Hence you will not find
      a source module named `epoch_mining.erl` in the codebase. Most of
      these extra sinks will not log to the console, only to log files.
- Main applications (in reverse start order), most under the main repo
  (`github.com/aeternity/aeternity.git`) under the `apps` directory; the rest
  will be found under `_build/default/lib`:
  - `aedevmode`
    - (Something about keypairs for testing. Runs `aedevmode_emitter`.)
  - `aesync`
    - The aesync app just launches `aec_connection_sup`, which exists under
      the aecore application. It is a "supervisor for servers dealing with
      inter node communication"
  - `aestratum`
    - An implementation of server side part of the Stratum protocol. The
      purpose of the protocol is to formalize the coordination of information
      exchange between pool server and pool clients. See [docs/stratum.md]
  - `aemon`
    - Network monitoring (disabled by default). Uses statsd backend provided
      by `aec_metrics.erl`. See [docs/monitoring.md]
  - `aehttp`
    - The HTTP API. This app doesn't have any actual child processes of
      its own. It just starts Cowboy endpoints.
    - The Cowboy setup is done in `aehttp_app` which calls
      `aehttp_api_router` to get the endpoint data.
      - The endpoints are specified in `apps/aehttp/priv/oas3.yaml` which
        is used to generate callback modules `oas_endpoints`, `endpoints`
        (the old Swagger version), and `rosetta_endpoints`.
      - `aehttp_api_router` calls these to get the data, and then filters
        it depending on what should be enabled. Note that the important
        `enabled_endpoint_groups` setting is computed in
        `aehttp_app:check_env()`, which runs from a `setup` hook defined
        in `aecore.app.src`.
    - All endpoints enter via `aehttp_api_handler:handle_request_json()`
      which dispatches to one of the modules `aehttp_dispatch_ext`,
      `aehttp_dispatch_int`, or `aehttp_dispatch_rosetta`. These may
      reject a request if the system is overloaded, or put it in a run
      queue for later (see `aec_jobs_queues`). `aehttp_api_handler` also
      does the conversion between JSON-as-text and JSON-as-Erlang-terms
      for request inputs and outputs, using the `jsx` library.
      - For example, the request `GetCurrentKeyBlockHeight` is actually
        handled in the module `aehttp_dispatch_ext`, like this:
        ```erlang
        handle_request_('GetCurrentKeyBlockHeight', Req, Context) ->
            TopBlock = aec_chain:top_block(),
            Height = aec_blocks:height(TopBlock),
            {200, [], #{height => Height}};
        ```
  - `aechannel`
    - State channels (`aesc_...`). The aesc_fsm.erl state machine is
      described by the PlantUML file [docs/state-channels/fsm.puml].
  - `aeapi`
    - A single facade module for the internal API functions. Does not launch
      any child processes, or even any supervisor.
  - `aecore`
    - The Core Aeternity Application supervisor tree. Runs the
      `aec_worker_sup`, `aec_consensus_sup`, and `aec_conductor_sup`. It used
      to run the `aec_connection_sup` as well, before that was moved to the
      `aesync` app.
      - `aec_worker_sup`
        - Runs `aec_metrics`, `aec_keys`, and `aec_tx_pool`
      - `aec_consensus_sup`
        - Initially empty
      - `aec_conductor_sup`
        - Runs `aec_conductor` and `aec_block_generator`
  - `aecli`
    - The CLI, based on `ecli`. The supervisor is started with no children.
  - `aefate`
    - The FATE virtual machine. A library application, does not start any
      processes.
  - `ecrecover` (`github.com/aeternity/ecrecover.git`)
    - Library for verifying Ethereum signatures.
  - `aega`
    - Library for Generalized Accounts
  - `aeprimop`
    - Library for primitive operations to modify chain state objects.
  - `aeoracle`
    - Library for Oracles.
  - `aens`
    - Naming System library.
  - `aecontract`
    - Library for Contracts
  - `aevm`
    - Other VM (Aethereum?)
  - `aebytecode` (`github.com/aeternity/aebytecode.git`)
    - Library and standalone assembler for Aeternity bytecode, supporting
      both AEVM bytecode and FATE bytecode.
  - `aeserialization` (`github.com/aeternity/aeserialization.git`)
    - Serialization helpers for Aeternity node.
  - `aetx`
    - Library for Transactions ADT
  - `aeutils`
    - Library with various utility functions. Starts a supervisor with no
      children.
  - `aeminer` (`github.com/aeternity/aeminer.git`)
    - Erlang library to work with CPU and CUDA cuckoo miners.
  - `aecuckoo` (`github.com/aeternity/aecuckoo.git`)
    - Cuckoo CPU miner binaries.
